This is a early test release of the FreeHDL package.  As such, nothing
is final yet and everything is bound to be changed.  Please tell us
everything that you don't like about this package so that we can
improve it.  You are also allowed to tell us about the things that you
do like, of course, so that we don't make them worse.

Installation
------------

This package should behave like a regular GNUish package.  Generic
installation instructions for such a package can be found in the file
INSTALL.

Right now, there is only enough documentation to get you to run the
included example. Further, some additional info about the
compiler/simulator (e.g. a list of supported VHDL constructs) can be
found in README.v2cc.

Pick a suitable place to install this package in.  The default is
/usr/local.  Then run

    % ./configure --prefix <install-prefix>
    % make
    % make install

The last step will create some directories below <install-prefix> and
will put the created programs and some data files there. However, if
you prefer *not* to install the package (currently the simulator is
very limited, hence you will not be able to use it for "real" work!) 
check out README.v2cc for some additional info on how to execute the
compiler/simulator. Further, if your computer should run out of memory
during compilation run "make CXXFLAGS=-g" instead of just "make". 

You must make sure that the installed files can be found by your
system (otherwise you will only be able to compile an execute models
copied to the v2cc subdirectory).  That is, the directory
<install-prefix>/bin should be on your path and your linker should be
able to find libraries in <install-prefix>/lib.  We are not yet ready
to isolate you from these technicalities.

Running the example
-------------------

See file "README.v2cc" for some information on how to compile/run 
the example vhdl models.  


Where to send bug reports / suggestions / comments
--------------------------------------------------

If your report addresses a parser related topics then contact Marius
Vollmer <mvo@zagadka.ping.de>. If it is related to the code generator
or compiler then send an email to Edwin Naroska
<edwin@ds.e-technik.uni-dortmund.de>. If your are not sure send it to
Edwin. He will take care of forwarding your report to the appropriate
recipient.
