.TH FreeHDL-GENNODES "1" "January 2006" "Debian/GNU Linux" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
FreeHDL-GENNODES \- Abstract syntax tree generator used by the VHDL compiler/simulator FreeHDL.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B freehdl-gennodes
CMD CHUNK IN-FILE OUT-FILE
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBFreeHDL-GENNODES\fR is an extensible framework for representing an
abstract syntax tree.  The program reads the IN-FILE and generates
output for CHUNK in OUT-FILE, according to CMD.

When CMD is `header', FreeHDL-GENNODES writes a header file to
OUT-FILE that should be included by the users of the CHUNK.  When it
is `impl', it writes the implementation of CHUNK.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
freehdl-v2cc(1), freehdl-config(1), v2cc.libs(5)
.SH AVAILABILITY
The latest version of FreeHDL can always be obtained from
\fBwww.freehdl.seul.org\fR
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Known bugs are documented within the BUGS file.  If your report
addresses a parser related topic then contact Marius Vollmer
<mvo@zagadka.ping.de>.  If it is related to the code generator or
compiler then send an email to Edwin Naroska
<edwin@ds.e-technik.uni-dortmund.de>.  If your are not sure send it to
Edwin.  He will take care of forwarding your report to the appropriate
recipient.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Marius Vollmer \(co 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001 <mvo@zagadka.ping.de>
.PP
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.SH AUTHORS
Written by Marius Vollmer <mvo@zagadka.ping.de> and Edwin Naroska
<edwin@ds.e-technik.uni-dortmund.de>.
