.TH FreeHDL-CONFIG "1" "January 2006" "Debian/GNU Linux" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
FreeHDL-CONFIG \- The FreeHDL configuration script.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B freehdl-config
[\fIOPTION\fR] ...
.SH DESCRIPTION

\fBFreeHDL\fR is a parser/compiler/simulator suite for the hardware
description language VHDL.  VHDL'93 as well as VHDL'87 files are
supported.

\fBFreeHDL-CONFIG\fR can be used to obtain the installation (path)
configuration of the FreeHDL package.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB-v, \-\-version\fR
show installed FreeHDL version
.TP
\fB-h, \-\-help\fR
show usage info
.TP
\fB-l, \-\-ldflags\fR
print libraries to link with
.TP
\fB-libs, \-\-libtool\fR
print libtool libraries to link with
.TP
\fB-ieee, \-\-ieee\fR
print IEEE libtool libraries to link with
.TP
\fB-c, \-\-cxxflags\fR
print C++ compiler flags to compile with
.TP
\fB-cxx, \-\-cxx\fR
print C++ compiler
\fB-linker, \-\-linker\fR
print libtool linker
.SH SEE ALSO
gvhdl(1), freehdl-v2cc(1), v2cc.libs(5)
.SH AVAILABILITY
The latest version of FreeHDL can always be obtained from
\fBwww.freehdl.seul.org\fR
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Known bugs are documented within the BUGS file.  If your report
addresses a parser related topic then contact Marius Vollmer
<mvo@zagadka.ping.de>.  If it is related to the code generator or
compiler then send an email to Edwin Naroska
<edwin@ds.e-technik.uni-dortmund.de>.  If your are not sure send it to
Edwin.  He will take care of forwarding your report to the appropriate
recipient.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Stefan Jahn \(co 2006 <stefan@lkcc.org>
.PP
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.SH AUTHORS
Written by Stefan Jahn <stefan@lkcc.org>.
