.TH FreeHDL-V2CC "1" "December 2005" "Debian/GNU Linux" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
FreeHDL-V2CC \- A VHDL to C++ converter.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B freehdl-v2cc
[\fIOPTION\fR] ... [\fIFILE\fR] ...
.SH DESCRIPTION

\fBFreeHDL\fR is a parser/compiler/simulator suite for the hardware
description language VHDL.  VHDL'93 as well as VHDL'87 files are
supported.

\fBFreeHDL-V2CC\fR translates the original VHDL source FILEs into
C++.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-o\fR FILE
Write C++ generated code to FILE.
.TP
\fB\-n\fR
Dry run.
.TP
\fB\-R\fR
Emit register code.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR
Enable verbosity.
.TP
\fB\-g\fR
Emit debugging code.
.TP
\fB\-D\fR
Emit CDFG code.
.TP
\fB\-l\fR LIBNAME
Use LIBNAME as the WORK library, default is the "." library directory.
.TP
\fB\--relaxed-component-visibility\fR
Allows invisible default bindings from \fIWORK\fR.
.TP
\fB\--depend\fR FILE
Write dependency information to FILE.
.TP
\fB\-m\fR FILE
Emit the main() file C++ code to FILE.
.TP
\fB\-L\fR VHDLLIB
Path to VHDL library root directory.  Within this directory the
compiler search for a file named \fIv2cc.libs\fR.  The mapping file
\fIv2cc.libs\fR translates library unit names to directories.  Note
that more than one VHDLLIB may be provided.
.SH "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES"
.TP
V2CC_LIBRARY_PATH
The variable V2CC_LIBRARY_PATH consists of ":" separated filenames.
In addition to the environment variable, you can use the "-L libdir"
command line option with v2cc.  The directories specified with "-L"
are added in front of the ones specified by V2CC_LIBRARY_PATH.  In the
final library path, they appear in the same order as on the command
line.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
gvhdl(1), freehdl-config(1), v2cc.libs(5)
.SH AVAILABILITY
The latest version of FreeHDL can always be obtained from
\fBwww.freehdl.seul.org\fR
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Known bugs are documented within the BUGS file.  If your report
addresses a parser related topic then contact Marius Vollmer
<mvo@zagadka.ping.de>.  If it is related to the code generator or
compiler then send an email to Edwin Naroska
<edwin@ds.e-technik.uni-dortmund.de>.  If your are not sure send it to
Edwin.  He will take care of forwarding your report to the appropriate
recipient.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Edwin Naroska \(co 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005
<edwin@ds.e-technik.uni-dortmund.de>
.PP
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.SH AUTHORS
Written by Marius Vollmer <mvo@zagadka.ping.de> and Edwin Naroska
<edwin@ds.e-technik.uni-dortmund.de>.
